So we're gonna be spending most of
the day on this website learn.svelte.dev.
This is our interactive tutorial platform,
we've been working on it for
about a year and
this week it is finally done.
I'm so excited to start
sharing this with people and
recommending that people
Learn Svelte on Learn.svelte.dev.
There's a lot of fairly cutting edge
technology inside this website.
In fact, it is so cutting edge that
it does not run on Safari just yet.
It will do, Safari 16.4 will add the
necessary APIs for this website to work.
But for now, I recommend that you
open this website in Firefox or
Chrome if you want to follow along.
So a quick orientation.
On the left we have the text that is
gonna walk us through each exercise.
We also have a menu up here.
If you open that,
you can see all of the different parts.
Part one basic Svelte,
part two advanced Svelte.
That's what we're gonna be doing in this
session and then in the next session
when we have a SvelteKit,
we'll cover parts three and four.
On the right hand side,
we have a file tree and
some exercises you'll be able to
edit file names and add new files.
But for most of the time,
what you see is what you get.
To the right of that
we have a code editor.
You can edit text in here and
it will be reflected in the iframe below,
which is showing the output
of building this application.
You'll see that we have a little
reload icon above the iframe.
It is possible to get your application
into a broken state, in which case, just
hit the refresh button and it will act as
though your browser had been reloaded.
You also have a URL bar to show where
we are in the app at the moment.
We have an open in new tab button
to the right of the URL bar.
And finally, we have a toggle for
the terminal.
Most of the time you won't need this,
but in some of the later exercises,
particularly in SvelteKit,
it'll be useful to be able to see what's
happening inside your development server.
Finally we have this gray solve button.
It is grayed out on this exercise
because there's nothing to do,
this is all just exposition.
But on the next exercise,
you'll see it turn orange, and
you will be tempted to press it.
I urge you to resist that temptation.
To learn this,
it's better if you follow the exercise and
type in the code yourself.
You will still learn things if you
hit the Solve button and cheat,
but you won't learn it as well.
It's kinda like the difference
between walking around a city and
driving around a city.
If you walk, if you do the effort
yourself, then you will develop a much
richer mental map and you will
understand the content a lot better.
So consider the Solve button a last
resort, if you get stuck and
you feel like you're falling behind, you
can hit Solve to see what the exercise is
supposed to look like, but try and
complete the exercise without doing that.
Okay, so what is Svelte?
Well, Svelte is a tool for
building web applications.
It falls into the category of
user interface frameworks, and
UI frameworks all essentially are involved
in the task of making apps easier to build
by taking the code that you would have
to write to update the DOM in a manual
imperative fashion.
And allowing you to write it in
a declarative state driven fashion.
This tends to result in much more
maintainable and understandable code.
So it allows you to build your app
declaratively out of components that
combine markups, styles, and behaviors
into a single atomic unit that you can
then compose together to
build something more complex.
So it's similar to things like React and
View if you've used frameworks like those,
but it has one key difference.
It leans into the idea that a compiler
can take the code that you wrote and
turn it into some other code.
So Svelte is also a language.
It's a language that goes into
the compiler and then JavaScript,
highly optimized vanilla JavaScript
comes out the other side.
You can build your entire
application with Svelte.
You can use an application like Svelte
Kit, which we're gonna talk about later.
Or you can add it incrementally to
an existing code base if you have one of
those.
And you can also build components and then
publish into NPM for other people to use.
Okay, this part we've covered, so
I'm gonna stick skip to the end.
And we'll begin with our first component.
So as I explained in Svelte,
an application is composed of one or
more components,
which is a reusable self contained block
of code that encapsulates HTML, CSS and
JavaScript that belong together written
into a .svelte file, not a .js file.
We have our own file format because
we're using our own language.
So App.svelte on the right here,
this is a Svelte component, and
this is the contents,
just an H1, Hello World.
You'll notice that that is just HTML.
And that's an important fact about Svelte.
HTML is also valid Svelte.
So if you see some user interface on
a website that you're looking at,
you can go into DevTools, you can grab
that HTML, and the styles that affect it,
you can put it into a Svelte component,
and it will work.
Same deal if you see some HTML on Stack
Overflow or CodePen or a thing like that,
you can just drop it into your
Svelte component, and it will work.
Cuz obviously this isn't very interesting
just having a static component like this
that doesn't do anything.
So let's add some data.
First we will begin by adding
a script tag to the top of the file.
Now if you're lazy like me, your first
instinct will be to say, well okay,
I'm just gonna select that and copy it.
And if you do, you will see that copy and
paste is actually disabled for
the same reason that we discourage
you from pressing the Solve button,
we encourage you to type out the text
that is asking you to type out.
You will learn a lot better that way, you
will develop the right muscle memory, and
you will notice things along the way.
So I do encourage you as far as
possible to type the code out,
although of course you can
disable it if you really need to.
So let's do that let's add a script
tag to the top of the component.
And we'll add a variable, call it name.
Give it a value of Svelte.
And now inside our component we can refer
to that name just by enclosing it in
curly braces.
If you've used React,
this should be familiar,
this is basically the same as JSX.
Now, inside that expression,
we can use any JavaScript we like.
So we can, for example,
call to uppercase like that,
and it goes from Hello Svelte
to Hello SVELTE!
And we can do the same
with our attributes.
Same way that we can have
text inside components,
we can have dynamic
attributes in our elements.
This image is currently
missing a source attribute.
So let's add one there, source = source.
So this is Rick Roll,
everyone who's watching.
And this is all good but
if you hover over this image,
you will notice something is wrong.
It's telling us that the image
should have an Alt attribute.
This is because not everyone
can see those images.
In some cases because people
have impaired vision.
In some cases it's because
they have rubbish Internet and
they haven't downloaded the image yet.
So it's very important that when
we're building web apps, we do so
in a way that is accessible to
the largest number of people.
And Svelte will help you do that
by telling you when you make
accessibility mistakes like
forgetting to add an Alt attribute.
So let's add one to this element here.
It should be a description of what
is happening inside the image.
And you'll notice that when you add that,
that warning disappears,
the compiler is now happy.
And of course, we can,
if we want, make that dynamic.
The name is Rick.
Lastly, And we'll replace
that in the alt attribute like so.
And finally, one thing that
Svelte does is it allows you to
use shorthand attributes when
the name of the attribute and
the value of the attribute
happen to go inside.
So here,
you can see that source equals source.
Well, that's duplicative.
So we can just replace that
with source like that.
Just a little quality of life enhancement.
Now most of the time when you're
building a user interface,
you will need to add Svelte.
And in fact, the dirty secret of
UI development is that most of
your code is probably
gonna end up being CSS.
At least that's my experience.
I have some markup, and I have some
JavaScript, and I have a whole lot of CSS.
And so JavaScript,
sorry, Svelte is not a JavaScript
framework, it is a web framework.
It allows you to keep your styles
alongside your components, and
you can write those into a style tag like.
So let's add a P selector that's gonna
target this paragraph, give it a color.
I'm gonna choose goldenrod,
gonna give it a font family of Comic Sans,
the greatest font,
give that a fallback for
the people who don't have Comic Sans for
whatever reason.
And we'll give it a slightly
bigger font size of 2.
And so now we have some styles that
are attached to our component.
Now what's interesting about the styles
here is that they are scoped to this
component.
And what I mean by that is even
though we've just used a P selector,
we haven't added a special class name or
anything like that it won't affect
any other paragraphs on the page.
It will only affect the elements
inside this component.
That's useful when we start having
multiple components on the page.
Because it would be impractical to put
your entire application in a single
component, obviously.
Instead, we can import
components from other files and
we can include them in a markup.
So, let's put a script tag
at the top of App.svelte,
And let's import this nested
component inside app.
This is just like importing
any other JavaScript module,
default export is the component.
Once we've done that,
we can include that component inside app.
And so again, you'll notice that even
though Nested.svelte has a p element and
App.svelte has a p selector, the styles
do not affect the nested component,
and that's really good for
maintainability.
So, quick note at the bottom here,
component names are always capitalized
to distinguish them from HTML elements.
So, anytime you see something like this,
that is an HTML element.
Anytime you see angle bracket followed
by a capital letter that is referring to
a Very often
you will need to inject arbitrary
HTML into your applications.
And right now, we have some HTML
in this variable string, but
it's just printing it out literally,
which isn't what we want in this case.
We can change that by using
the special HTML tag.
All we need to do is put this HTML
directive at the beginning of the tag,
like so.
You'll now see that down here, the strong
element is being rendered correctly.
There is a warning with this,
we are not sanitizing the HTML,
you can only do this
with data that you trust.
You do not wanna do this with data that
you've got from a database unless you have
already sanitized it because that will
open up your users to cross site scripting
attacks and
that is not a thing that we wanna do.